DOCSP-27390 aggregation operations (#367)
mongodb/docs-java: source/fundamentals/aggregation-expression-operations.txt

aggregation stages. This list is passed to the ``aggregate()`` method of
``MongoCollection``.

Operations
----------

The following sections provide information and examples for
aggregation expression operations available in the driver.
The operations are categorized by purpose and functionality.

Each section has a table that describes aggregation methods
available in the driver and corresponding expression operators in the
Query API. The method names link to API documentation and the
aggregation pipeline operator names link to descriptions and examples in
the Server manual documentation. While each Java method is functionally
equivalent to the corresponding Query API expression, they may differ in
expected parameters and implementation.

.. note::

   The driver generates a Query API expression that may be different
   from the Query API expression provided in each example. However,
   both expressions will produce the same aggregation result.

.. important::

   The driver does not provide methods for all aggregation pipeline operators in
   the Query API. If you need to use an unsupported operation in an
   aggregation, you can create an expression as a BSON ``Document``

>    type. To learn more about the ``Document`` type, see :ref:`<fundamentals-documents>`.

Reviewer: omitted compound because it introduces new terminology that is not needed

     - :manual:`$concat </reference/operator/aggregation/concat/>`

   * - `last() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#last()>`__
     - :manual:`$last </reference/operator/aggregation/last-array-element/>`

   * - `map() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#map(java.util.function.Function)>`__
     - :manual:`$map </reference/operator/aggregation/map/>`

   * - `max() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#max(T)>`__
     - :manual:`$max </reference/operator/aggregation/max/>`

   * - `maxN() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#maxN(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlInteger)>`__
     - :manual:`$maxN </reference/operator/aggregation/maxN-array-element/>`

   * - `min() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#min(T)>`__
     - :manual:`$min </reference/operator/aggregation/min/>`

   * - `minN() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#minN(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlInteger)>`__

>      - :manual:`$map </reference/operator/aggregation/minN-array-element/>`

Reviewer 2: minN should map to minN

and I think the map method is missing

Reviewer: https://docs-mongodbcom-staging.corp.mongodb.com/java/docsworker-xlarge/docsp-27390-aggregation-operations/fundamentals/aggregation-expression-operations/#array-operations:~:text=%24last-,map(),-%24map

Here?

     - :manual:`$multiply </reference/operator/aggregation/multiply/>`

   * - `size() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#size()>`__
     - :manual:`$size </reference/operator/aggregation/size/>`

   * - `slice() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#slice(int,int)>`__
     - :manual:`$slice </reference/operator/aggregation/slice/>`

   * - `sum() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#sum(java.util.function.Function)>`__
     - :manual:`$sum </reference/operator/aggregation/sum/>`

   * - `union() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#union(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlArray)>`__
     - :manual:`$setUnion </reference/operator/aggregation/setUnion/>`

   * - `unionArrays() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#unionArrays(java.util.function.Function)>`__
     - :manual:`$setUnion </reference/operator/aggregation/setUnion/>`

.. tip::

   When retrieving arrays, you must specify the type of array that is returned

>    if you want to continue working with the return value.

Reviewer 2: It might help if this had the example in it, I think it is referring to specifying MqlDocument in `current().<MqlDocument>getArray("showtimes");`? And the "continue working with", maybe "if you need to work with the values of the array as that specific type".

Maybe it is better to put this point together with the example, like "the getArray method is used to ... . Specifying the type using <MqlDocument> ensures that `showtime` is an `MqlDocument`" or something like this.

I am unsure, because the "tip" does highlight this important point which might be skipped if it was buried in a paragraph, but when I read it here, it's not clear what it means to specify the type of the array, or to continue working with the return value (note that you can continue working with the return value even without specifying, since it will just assume that the elements are of the general type MqlValue).

Reviewer: I will leave it as a tip but move it down and change the content

the second entry is the number of regular seats. Each nested document
also contains the number of tickets that have already been bought for
the showtime. A document in this collection might resemble the
following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

   {
     "_id": ...,
     "movie": "Hamlet",
     "showtimes": [
       {
         "date": "May 14, 2023, 12:00 PM",
         "seats": [ 20, 80 ],
         "ticketsBought": 100
       },
       {
         "date": "May 20, 2023, 08:00 PM",
         "seats": [ 10, 40 ],
         "ticketsBought": 34
       }]
   }

The ``filter()`` method displays only the results matching the provided
predicate. In this case, the predicate uses ``sum()`` to calculate the
total number of seats and compares that value to the number of ``ticketsBought``
with ``lt()``. The ``project()`` method stores these filtered results as a new
``availableShowtimes`` array.

The following code shows the pipeline for this aggregation:

.. code-block:: java
   :copyable: true

   var showtimes = current().<MqlDocument>getArray("showtimes");

   asList(project(fields(
       computed("availableShowtimes", showtimes
           .filter(showtime -> {

>                var totalSeats = showtime
>                    .<MqlInteger>getArray("seats")
>                    .sum(n -> n);
>                var isAvailable = showtime
>                    .getInteger("ticketsBought")
>                    .lt(totalSeats);
>                return isAvailable;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            var seats = showtime.<MqlInteger>getArray("seats");
            var totalSeats = seats.sum(n -> n);
            var ticketsBought = showtime.getInteger("ticketsBought")
            var isAvailable = ticketsBought.lt(totalSeats);
            return isAvailable;
```
I think maybe you are right that this is cleaner. At least it saves two lines.

           }))
   )));

.. note::

   To improve readability, the previous example assigns intermediary values to
   the ``totalSeats`` and ``isAvailable`` variables. If you don't pull

>    out these intermediary values as variables, the code still produces

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   out these intermediary values into variables, the code still produces
```

     - :manual:`$gte </reference/operator/aggregation/gte/>`

   * - `lt() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValue.html#lt(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlValue)>`__
     - :manual:`$lt </reference/operator/aggregation/lt/>`

   * - `lte() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValue.html#lte(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlValue)>`__
     - :manual:`$lte </reference/operator/aggregation/lte/>`

   * - | `max() for MqlInteger <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlInteger.html#max(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlInteger)>`__
       | `max() for MqlNumber <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlNumber.html#max(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlNumber)>`__

     - *No corresponding operator*

   * - | `min() for MqlInteger <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlInteger.html#min(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlInteger)>`__
       | `min() for MqlNumber <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlNumber.html#min(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlNumber)>`__

>      - *No corresponding operator*

Reviewer 2: max and min correspond to $max and $min

       | `ofDateArray() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValues.html#ofDateArray(java.time.Instant...)>`__
       | `ofIntegerArray() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValues.html#ofIntegerArray(int...)>`__
       | `ofNumberArray() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValues.html#ofNumberArray(double...)>`__
       | `ofStringArray() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValues.html#ofStringArray(java.lang.String...)>`__

     - *No corresponding operator*

   * - `ofEntry() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValues.html#ofEntry(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString,T)>`__
     - *No corresponding operator*

   * - `ofMap() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValues.html#ofMap()>`__
     - *No corresponding operator*

   * - `ofNull() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValues.html#ofNull()>`__
     - *No corresponding operator*

Refer to any of the other sections for examples using these convenience

> operators.

Reviewer 2: Let's add a note that says something like:

> Values provided to these methods are treated literally. For example, `of("$x")` represents the string value `"$x"`, rather than a field `x`.

   * - `merge() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDocument.html#merge(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlDocument)>`__
     - :manual:`$mergeObjects </reference/operator/aggregation/mergeObjects/>`

   * - `setField() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlDocument.html#setField(java.lang.String,com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlValue)>`__
     - :manual:`$setField </reference/operator/aggregation/setField/>`

   * - `unsetField() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/>`__
     - :manual:`$unsetField </reference/operator/aggregation/unsetField/MqlDocument.html#unsetField(java.lang.String)>`

Suppose you have a collection of legacy customer data which includes
addresses as nested documents in the ``mailing.address`` field. You want
to find all the customers who currently live in Washington state. A
document in this collection might resemble the following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

   {
     "_id": ...,
     "customer.name": "Elizabeth Ray",
     "mailing.address":
     {
       "street": "9286 Bethany Glens",
       "city": "Vasqueztown",
       "state": "CO",

>        "zip": 22939

Reviewer 3: IT's not terribly important, but I am curious why you changed this? I pulled it out of our sample data that gets loaded into Atlas if you load sample data.

     - *No corresponding operator*

   * - `setValue() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlEntry.html#setValue(T)>`__
     - *No corresponding operator*

   * - `unset() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlMap.html#unset(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - *No corresponding operator*

Suppose you have a collection of warehouse data where each document
represents an individual warehouse. Each document contains a field that
is a map of the quantities for individual item IDs. You want to
represent this map as an array to highlight the two lowest stocked items in
each warehouse.

The ``entries()`` method returns the map entries in the ``inventory``
field as an array. The ``minN()`` method finds the two lowest valued array
entries for each document. This example stores the result
as the new ``lowInventory`` field using the ``project()`` method.

The following code shows the pipeline for this aggregation:

.. code-block:: java
   :copyable: true

   var inventory = current().getMap("inventory");

   asList(project(fields(
       computed("lowInventory", inventory
           .entries()

>            .minN(of(2)))

Reviewer 2: I don't think that the minN will work here in a non-accidental way. While it's true that it will compare entry documents, this is unreliable if the entry's fields are "out of order" (for example, the key, which is the name of the item, gets evaluated first to determine the "smallest" value, but actually it's the value that should be compared). (And there's no real way to force order for fields.)

I don't think we have a sort operator, so I'm not sure this can work at all. If I had to do it, I would map entries into arrays that placed the inventory first, and the name of the item second (via `entries().map(e -> ofArray(e.getValue(), e.getKey())`), and then I think (but would need to verify the docs on this) that the order would be assured because the first item of the array would be guaranteed to be compared before the second. But this gets a bit convoluted.

The example might have to be changed to use something that takes a function (like `v->v.getValue()`). Maybe instead of warehouses with items, there are items with warehouses, and you do `currentItem.warehouses.entries().sum(v -> v.getValue())` to count up the item's total quantity across all warehouses it's stored in? Or something with a similar pattern.

     - :manual:`$toUpper </reference/operator/aggregation/toUpper/>`

Suppose you need to generate lowercase usernames for employees of a
company from the employees' last names and employee IDs.

The ``append()`` method combines the ``firstName`` and ``lastName`` fields into
a single username, while the ``toLower()`` method makes the entire username
lowercase. This example stores the result as a new ``username`` field using
the ``project()`` method.

The following code shows the pipeline for this aggregation:

.. code-block:: java
   :copyable: true

   var lastName = current().getString("lastName");
   var employeeID = current().getString("employeeID");

   asList(project(fields(
       computed("username", lastName
           .append(employeeID)
           .toLower())
   )));
   
The following code provides an equivalent aggregation pipeline in
the Query API:

.. code-block:: javascript
   :copyable: true

   [ { $project: {
       username: {
           $toLower: { $concat: ["$lastName", "$employeeID"] } }
   } } ]

Type-Checking Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can perform a type-check operation on a value of type ``MqlValue``

> using the methods described in this section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using the methods described in this section. These methods do not return boolean values, but instead allow the user to specify a default value to use when the original value, of unknown type, is not of the specified type. To perform branching logic based on type checks, see switchOn.
```
I added the (imperfect) wording above because it seems odd to call these type checks. Usually, a type-check is like  `o instanceof String` in Java, which returns a boolean, and allows for branching logic. These "type checks" are more like "casts" with a default value in case the cast fails. I guess they could be called "Casting Operations" but I suspect that would be more confusing.

   * - `isDateOr() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValue.html#isDateOr(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlDate)>`__
     - *No corresponding operator*

   * - `isDocumentOr() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValue.html#isDocumentOr(T)>`__
     - *No corresponding operator*

   * - `isIntegerOr() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValue.html#isIntegerOr(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlInteger)>`__
     - *No corresponding operator*

   * - `isMapOr() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValue.html#isMapOr(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlMap)>`__
     - *No corresponding operator*

   * - `isNumberOr() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValue.html#isNumberOr(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlNumber)>`__
     - *No corresponding operator*

   * - `isStringOr() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlValue.html#isStringOr(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlString)>`__
     - *No corresponding operator*

Suppose you have a collection of rating data. An early version of the review

> schema allowed users to submit reviews without a star rating. You want to clean up
> the data, and convert any reviews without a star rating to be the minimum

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
schema allowed users to submit reviews without a star rating. You want to 
convert any reviews without a star rating to have the minimum
```
I would think "clean up" implies changing the stored data.

> value of 1 star.

Reviewer 2: ...but what if the review was very good!

Just a note - this is entirely optional - it seems a bit more usual to apply a general rating to a missing specific rating:

```
var comfort = current().getField("comfort");
var overall = current().getField("overall");

computed("comfort", comfort.isNumberOr(overall))
```

Reviewer 3: Fair point - I was trying to make it be a case where reviews used to be 0-based for negative reviews and the system is going to 1-based for negative reviews. I added some clarification to specify this was just for negative reviews.

The ``isNumberOr()`` method returns either the value of ``rating``, or
a value of ``1`` if ``rating`` is not a number or is null. The

> ``project()`` method returns this value as a new ``filteredRating`` field.

Reviewer 2: It is odd to call this a filtered rating, since items are not being `filter`ed, but rather `map`ped to 1.

   var location = current().getString("location");

   asList(match(expr(location.eq(of("California")))));

The following code provides an equivalent aggregation pipeline in
the Query API:

.. code-block:: javascript
   :copyable: true

>    [ { $match: { location: { $eq: "California" } } } ]

Reviewer: discussed in slack

.. code-block:: javascript
   :copyable: true

   [ 
       { $addFields: { a: { $objectToArray: { $getField: "mailing.address" } } } },
       { $match: { "a.k": "state", "a.v": "WA" } },

>        { $project: { a: 0 } }

Reviewer 2: I think this should only have one stage, because the Java only specifies one stage. I think something like: 

`[ { $match: { $eq: [  { $getField: "mailing.address" }, "WA" ] } } ]`

but it would need to be confirmed.

Reviewer: I did a lot of testing for this, and ran into a lot of trouble because the top level field name contains a period. I really couldn't figure out how to write the valid MQL for this using a plain match stage!
